I speak to you for the first time as Prime Minister in a solemn hour for the life of our country,
of our empire, of our allies, and above all of the cause of freedom.
A tremendous battle is raging in France and flanders.
The Germans by a remarkable combination of air bombing and heavily armored tanks
have broken through the French defenses north of the Maginot line and strong columns of
their armored vehicles are ravaging the open country which for the first day or two was without
defenders. They have penetrated deeply and spread alarm and confusion in their track.
Behind them there are now appearing infantry in lorries and behind them again the large masses
are moving forward. The regroupment of the French armies to make head again and also to strike
at this intruding wedge has been proceeding for several days largely assisted by the magnificent
efforts of the Royal Air Force. We must not allow ourselves to be intimidated by the presence
of the armored vehicles in unexpected places behind our lines. If they are behind our front
the French are also at many points fighting actively behind there. Both sides are therefore in an
extremely dangerous position and if the French army and our own army are well handled and I believe
they will be if the French retain that genius for recovery and counterattack which they have
so long been famous and if the British army shows the doggyed endurance and solid fighting power
of which there have been so many examples in the past then a sudden transformation of the scene
might spring into being. It would be foolish however to disguise the gravity of the hour.
It would be still more foolish to loot heart and courage or to suppose that well trained well
equipped armies numbering three or four millions of men can be overcome in the space of a few weeks
or even months by a scoop or raid of mechanized vehicles however formidable.
We may look with confidence to the stabilization of the front in front and to the general
engagement of the masses which will enable the qualities of the French and British soldiers
to be matched squarely against those of their adversaries.
For myself I have invincible confidence in the French army and its leaders only a very small part
of that splendid army and yet been heavily engaged and only a very small part of France had yet
been invaded. There is good evidence to show that practically the whole of the specialized and
mechanized forces of the enemy have been already thrown into the battle and we know that very
heavy losses have been inflicted upon them. No officer or man, no brigade or division which
grapples at close quarters with the enemy wherever encountered can fail to make a worthy
contribution to the general result. The armies must cast away the idea of resisting attack
behind concrete lines or natural obstacles and must realize that mastery can only be regained
by furious and unrelenting assault and this spirit must not only animate the high command
but must inspire every fighting man. In the air, often at serious odds, often at odds,
to the two who thought overwhelming, we have been clawing down three or four to one of our enemy
and the relative balance of the British and German air forces is now considerably more
favorable to us than at the beginning of the battle. In cutting down the German bombers,
we are fighting our own battle as well as that of France. My confidence in our ability to fight
it out to the finish with the German air force has been strengthened by the fierce encounters
which have taken place and are taking place. At the same time, our heavy bombers are striking
nightly at the taproot of German mechanized power and have already inflicted serious damage
upon the oil refineries on which the Nazi effort to dominate the world directly depends.
We must expect that as soon as stability is reached on the western front,
the bulk of that hideous apparatus of aggression which dashed Holland into ruin and slavery
in a few days will be turned upon us. I am sure I speak for all when I say we are ready to face it,
to endure it and to retaliate against it, to any extent that the unwritten laws of war permit.
There will be many men and many women in this island who when the ordeal comes upon them
and come it will will feel comfort and even a pride that they are sharing the perils of our
leds at the front. Soldiers, sailors and airmen, God bless them and are drawing away for them a
part at least of the onslaught they have to bear. He is not this the appointed time for all to make
the utmost exertions in their power. If the battle is to be won, we must provide our men with
ever increasing quantities of the weapons and ammunition they need. We must have and have quickly
more aeroplanes, more tanks, more shells, more guns. There is imperious need for these vital
munitions. They increase our strength against the powerfully armed enemy. They replace the wastage
of the obstinate struggle and the knowledge that wastage will speedily be replaced enables us to
draw more readily upon our reserves and throw them in now that everything counts so much. Our task
is not only to win the battle but to win the war. After this battle in France abates its force,
there will come the battle for our islands, for all that Britain is and all that Britain means
that will be the struggle. In that supreme emergency, we shall not hesitate to take every step,
even the most drastic to call forth from our people the last ounce and the last inch of effort
of which they are capable. The interests of property, the hours of labor are nothing compared to
the struggle for life and honor, for right and freedom to which we have vowed ourselves.
I have received from the chiefs of the French Republic and in particular from its
indomitable Prime Minister, Monsieur Reino, the most sacred pledges that whatever happens they will
fight to the end be it bitter nor be it glorious. No, if we fight to the end it can only be glorious.
Having received its majesty's commission, I have formed an administration of men and women
of every party and of almost every point of view. We have differed and quarreled in the past
that now one bound unite us at all. The wage war until victory is won and never to surrender
ourselves to servitude and shame, whatever the cost and the agony may be.
This is one of the most awestriking periods in the long history of France and Britain.
It is also beyond doubt the most sublime, side by side, unaided except by their
kitten kin in the great dominions and by the wide empires which rest beneath their shield,
side by side the British and French peoples have advanced to rescue not only Europe but mankind
from the foulest and most soul-destroying tyranny which has ever darkened and stained the pages
of history. Behind us, behind the armies and fleets of Britain and France gather a group of
shattered states and bludgeoned races, the checks, the polls, the Norwegians, the Danes,
the Dutch, the Belgians, upon all of whom the long night of barbarism will descend unbroken
even by a star of hope unless we conquer as conquer we must, as conquer we shall.
Today is Trinity Sunday.
Century to go words were written to be a call and a spur to the faithful servants of truth and justice.
Arm yourselves and be men of valor and be in readiness for the conflict for it is better for us
to perish in battle than to look upon the outrage of our nation and our altars as the will of God
is in heaven, even so let him do.
